there's a question I've been puzzling
over and writing about for pretty much
all of my adult life why does some
large-scale crises jolt us awake and
inspire us to change and evolve while
others might jolt us a bit but then it's
back to sleep now the kind of shocks I'm
talking about are big a cataclysmic
market crash rising fascism an
industrial accident that poisons on a
massive scale
now events like this can act like a
collective alarm bell suddenly we see a
threat we get organized we discover
strength and resolve that was previously
unimaginable it's as if we're no longer
walking but leaping accept our
collective alarm seems to be busted
faced with a crisis we often fall apart
regress and that becomes a window for
anti-democratic forces to push societies
backwards to become more unequal and
more unstable ten years ago I wrote
about this backwards process and I
called it the Shock Doctrine so what
determines which road we navigate
through crisis whether we grow up fast
and find those strengths or whether we
get knocked back and I'd say this is a
pressing question these days because
things are pretty shocking out there
record-breaking storms drowning cities
record-breaking fires threatening to
devour them thousands of migrants
disappearing beneath the waves and
openly supremacist movements rising in
many of our countries there are torches
in the streets and now there's no
shortage of people who are sounding the
alarm but as a society I don't think we
can honestly say
that were responding with anything like
the urgency that these overlapping
crises demand from us and yet we know
from history that it is possible for
crisis to catalyze a kind of
evolutionary leap and one of the most
striking examples of this progressive
power of crisis is the great crash of
1929 there was the shock of the sudden
market collapse followed by all of the
aftershocks the millions who lost
everything thrown onto bread lines and
this was taken by many as a message that
the system itself was broken and many
people listened and they left into
action in the United States and
elsewhere governments began to weave a
safety net so that the next time there
was a crash there would be programs like
Social Security to catch people there
were huge job-creating public
investments in housing electrification
and transit and there was a wave of an
aggressive regulation to rein in the
banks now these reforms were far from
perfect in the u.s. african-american
workers immigrants and women were
largely excluded but the depression
period along with the transformation of
Allied nations and economies during the
World War 2 effort show us that it is
possible for complex societies to
rapidly transform themselves in the face
of a collective threat now when we tell
the story of the 1929 crash that's
usually the formula that it follows that
there was a shock and it induced a
wake-up call and that produced a leap to
a safer place now if that's really what
it took then why isn't it working
anymore
why do today's non-stop shocks why don't
they spur us into action
why don't they produce leaps especially
when it comes to climate change so I
want to talk to you today about what I
think is a much more complete recipe for
deep transformation catalyzed by
shocking events and I'm going to focus
on two key ingredients that usually get
left out of the history books one has to
do with imagination the other with
organization because it's in the
interplay between the two where
revolutionary power lies so let's start
with imagination the victories of the
New Deal didn't happen just because
suddenly everybody understood the
brutalities of less a fair this was a
time let's remember of tremendous
ideological ferment when many different
ideas about how to organize societies
did battle with one another in the
public square a time when humanity dared
to dream big about different kinds of
futures many of them organized along
radically egalitarian lines now not all
of these ideas were good but this was an
era of explosive imagining this meant
that the movements demanding change knew
what they were against crushing poverty
widening inequality but just as
important they knew what they were for
they had their no and they had their yes
too they also had very different models
of political organization than we do
today
for decades social and labor movements
had been building up their membership
bases linking their causes together and
increasing their strengths which meant
that by the time the crash happened
there was already a movement that was
large and broad enough to for instance
staged strikes that didn't just shut
down factories but shut down entire
cities the big policy winds of the New
Deal were actually offered as
compromises because the alternative
seemed to be revolution so let's adjust
that equation from earlier a shocking
event plus utopian imagination plus
movement muscle that's how we get a real
leap so how does our present moment
measure up we are living once again at
time of extraordinary political
engagements politics is a mass obsession
progressive movements are growing and
resisting with tremendous courage and
yet we know from history that no is not
enough now there are some yeses out
there that are emerging and they're
actually getting a lot bolder quickly
where climate activists used to talk
about changing lightbulbs now we're
pushing for a hundred percent of our
energy to come from the Sun wind and
waves and to do it fast movements
catalyzed by police violence against
black bodies are calling for an end to
militarized police mass incarceration
and even for reparations for slavery
students are not just opposing tuition
increases but from Chile to Canada to
the UK they are calling for free tuition
and debt cancellation and yet this still
doesn't add up to the kind of holistic
and Universalist vision of a different
world that our predecessors had so why
is that well very often we think about
political change in defined compartments
these days environment in one box
inequality in another racial and gender
justice in a couple of other boxes
education over here health over there
and within each compartment there are
thousands upon thousands of different
groups and NGOs each competing with one
another for credit name recognition and
of course resources in other words we
act a lot like corporate brands now this
is often referred to as the problem of
silos now silos are understandable they
carve up our complex world into
manageable chunks they help us feel less
overwhelmed but in the process they also
train our brains to tune out when
somebody else's issue comes up and when
somebody else this issue needs our help
and support and they also help keep us
from seeing glaring connection
between our issues so for instance the
people fighting poverty and inequality
rarely talk about climate change even
though we see time and again that it's
the poorest of people who are the most
vulnerable to extreme weather the
climate change people rarely talk about
war and occupation even though we know
that the thirst for fossil fuels has
been a major driver of conflict the
environmental movement has gotten better
at pointing out that the nations that
are getting hit hardest by climate
change are populated overwhelmingly by
black and brown people but when black
lives are treated as disposable in
prisons and in schools and on the
streets these connections are too rarely
made the walls between our silos also
means that our solutions when they
emerge are also disconnected from each
other so progressives now have this long
list of demands that I was mentioning
early earlier those yeses but what we're
still missing is that coherent picture
of the world we're fighting for what it
looks like what it feels like and most
of all what its core values are and that
really matters because when large-scale
crises hit us and we are confronted with
the need to leap somewhere safer
there isn't any agreement on what that
place is and leapin without a
destination looks a lot like jumping up
and down fortunately there are all kinds
of conversations and experiments going
on to try to overcome these divisions
that are holding us back and I want to
finish by talking about one of them a
couple of years ago a group of us in
Canada decided that we were hitting the
limits of what we could accomplish in
our various silos so we locked ourselves
in a room for two days and we tried to
figure out what bound us together in
that room were people who rarely get
face to face there were indigenous
elders with hipsters working on transit
there was the head of Greenpeace with a
union leader representing oil workers
and loggers there were faith leaders and
feminist icons and many more
and we gave ourselves a pretty ambitious
assignment agreeing on a short statement
describing the world after we win the
world after we've already made the
transition to a clean economy and a much
fairer society in other words instead of
trying to scare people about what will
happen if we don't act we decided to try
to inspire them with what could happen
if we did act sensible people are always
telling us that changes change needs to
come in small increments that politics
is the art of the possible and that we
can't let the perfect be the enemy of
the good
well we rejected all of that we wrote a
manifesto and we called it the leap I
have to tell you that agreeing on our
common yes across such diversity of
experiences and against a backdrop of a
lot of painful history was not easy work
but it was also pretty thrilling because
as soon as we gave ourselves permission
to dream those threads connecting much
of our work became self-evident we
realized for instance that the
bottomless quest for profits that is
forcing so many people to work more than
50 hours a week without security and
that is fueling this epidemic of despair
is the same quest for bottomless profits
and endless growth that is at the heart
of our a collage achill crisis and is
destabilizing our planet it also became
clear what we need to do we need to
create a culture of caretaking
in which no one and nowhere is thrown
away in which the inherent value of all
people and every ecosystem is
foundational so we came up with this
people's platform and don't worry I'm
not going to read the whole thing to you
out loud if you're interested you can
read it at the leap org but I will give
you a taste of what we came up with so
we call for that 100 percent renewable
economy in a hurry but we went further
calls for new kinds of trade deals a
road
boss debate on a guaranteed annual
income full rights for immigrant workers
getting corporate money out of politics
free Universal daycare electoral reform
and more what we discovered is that a
great many of us are looking for
permission to act less like brands and
more like a movements because movements
don't care about credit they want good
ideas to spread far and wide what I love
about the leap is that it rejects the
idea that there is this hierarchy of
crisis and it doesn't ask anyone to
prioritize one struggle over another or
wait their turn and though it was
birthed in Canada we've discovered that
it travels well since we launched the
leap has been picked up around the world
with similar platforms being written
from Nunavut to Australia
to Norway to the UK and the US where
it's gaining a lot of traction in cities
like Los Angeles where it's being
localized and also in rural communities
that are traditionally very conservative
but where politics is failing the vast
majority of people here's what I've
learned from studying shocks and
disasters for two decades crises test us
we either fall apart or we grow up fast
finding new reserves of strength and
capacity that we never knew we had the
shocking events that fill us with dread
today can transform us and they can
transform the world for the better but
first we need to picture the world that
we're fighting for and we have to dream
it up together right now every alarm in
our house is going off simultaneously
it's time to listen it's time to leave
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]